R was initially developed for statisticians, who often are interested in generating plots or figures to visualize their data. As such, a few basic plotting features were built in when R was first developed. These are all still available; however, over time, a new approach to graphing in R was developed. This new approach implemented what is known as the grammar of graphics, which allows you to develop elegant graphs flexibly in R. Making plots with this set of rules requires the R package ggplot2. The grammar of graphics implemented in ggplot2 is based on the idea that you can build any plot as long as you have a few pieces of information. To start building plots in ggplot2, we'll need some data and to know the type of plot we want to make. The type of plot you want to make in ggplot2 is referred to as a geom. This will get us started, but the idea behind ggplot2 is that every new concept we introduce will be layered on top of the information you've already learned. So we'll start with the two basics (data and a geom) and then build from there.

To begin making exploratory plots and to build your first plot in ggplot2 we'll make use of the fact that there are some datasets already available in R. One frequently-used data set is known as diamond. This data set contains prices and other attributes of 53,940 diamonds, with each row containing information about a different diamond. If you look at the first few rows of data, you can get an idea of what data are included in this dataset. Here you see a lot of numbers and can get an idea of what data are available in this data set. For example, in looking at the column names across the top, you can see that we have information about how many carats each diamond is (carat), some information on the quality of the diamond cut (cut), the color of the diamond from J (worst) to D (best) (color), along with a number of other pieces of information about each diamond. We will use this data set to better understand how to generate plots in R, using ggplot2. While we will be generating basic plots here, know that we will be discussing how to change font size, color, and graph appearance in detail later.

As discussed in the first lesson in this course, histograms are helpful in displaying information about a single set of numbers. For example, if we wanted to see what the distribution of carats was for these data, we could use this code to make a histogram. Note,  in the code we specify that we will be using the diamonds dataset, that we are interested in plotting information about the diamonds' carat in the plot, and that the geom we are interested in plotting is a histogram with geom underscore histogram.

Scatterplots show the relationship between two numeric variables. In ggplot2 we specify these by defining x and y in the aes argument. The x argument defines which variable will be along the bottom of the plot. y refers to which variable will be along the left side of the plot. If we wanted to understand the relationship between the number of carats in a diamond and that diamond's price, we would use this code to make a scatterplot. Note that the overall format of the code is the same as it was for the histogram; however, we've defined x=carat and y=price and changed geom underscore histogram to geom underscore point. In this plot, we see that, in general, the larger the diamond is (or the more carats it has), the more expensive the diamond is (price), which is probably what we would have expected. However, now, we have a plot that supports this conclusion. 

Barplots show the relationship between a set of numbers and a categorical variable. In the diamonds data set, we may be interested in knowing how many diamonds there are of each cut of diamonds. There are five categories for cut of diamond. If we make a barplot for this variable, we can see the number of diamonds in each category. Again, the changes to the code are minimal. We are now interested in plotting the categorical variable cut and state that we want a bar plot, by including geom underscore bar. 

Boxplots provide a summary of a numerical variable across categories. For example, if you were interested to see how the price of a diamond (a numerical variable) changed across different diamond color categories (categorical variable), you may want to use a boxplot. In the code, we see that again, we only have to change what variables we want to be included in the plot the type of plot (or geom) we want (here, geom underscore boxplot) to get a basic boxplot. In the figure itself we see that the median price (the black horizontal bar in the middle of each box represents the median for each category) increases as the diamond color increases from the worst category (J) to the best (D).

While we've reviewed basic code to make a few common types of plots, there are a number of other plot types that can be made in ggplot2. These are listed in the online reference material for ggplot2 at http://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/reference/ or can be accessed through RStudio directly. To do so, you would type question mark geom underscore into the Console in RStudio. A list of geoms will appear. You can hover your cursor over any one of these to get a short description. 

Or, you can select a geom from this list and click enter. After selecting a geom, such as geom underscore abline and hitting 'Enter,' the help page for that geom will pop up in the 'Help' tab at bottom right. Here, you can find more detailed information about the selected geom.